---
layout: post
title:  Creativity with OODA Loop
date:   2021-05-21 6:30:00 -0500
categories: decision-making
---

Optimal decision making is a topic I've been interested in for awhile and one specific person that piqued my interest into the field of decision making was [John Boyd](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Boyd_%28military_strategist%29) and his observe-orient-decide-act (OODA) loop. Additionally, going to school for engineering provided me with a "designer" mindset that requires a certain amount of creativity to solve problems. After thinking about the OODA loop and the ingredients for design and creativity in engineering, I saw a number of parallels between the decision making process of the OODA loop and the iterative design process in engineering. This isn't particularly surprising since Boyd was also an engineer and spent a good portion of his life designing fighter jets, but I still think its interesting to point out how creativity can be summarized (to an extent) into a process. The OODA loop is deeply rooted in mathematics and physics - the deconstruction and integration of ideas is rooted in calculus, and there are components of Heisenberg's Indeterminacy Principle, and the 2nd Law of Thermodynamics. 

Boyd’s work on the OODA loop incorporated 3 separate mathematical models to create the system for creative decision making. The 3 models were Godel’s Incompleteness Theorem, Heisenberg’s Indeterminacy Principle, and the 2nd Law of Thermodynamics. Godel’s Incompleteness Theorem asserts that any consistent system is incomplete. Essentially, Godel is saying that there exists true statements in every system that cannot be proven with the logic that makes up the system. This does not mean that all systems cannot be proven true, it just means that to prove that a system is consistent requires going “outside” that system to incorporate postulates from a separate system. The second mathematical model that Boyd incorporates into the OODA loop is the Indeterminacy Principle. Heisenberg demonstrated in 1927 that the position and velocity could not be determined simultaneously for a particle or body. This means that the closer an observer gets to determining the velocity of a particle, the less certain the observer is on the position of the particle. In other words, the closer an observer gets to an object they are attempting to model, the uncertainty about the state of the object increases. Lastly. Boyd utilized the 2nd Law of Thermodynamics in the OODA loop to express that a closed system always increases entropy. The 2nd law states that under no circumstances will the entropy of a closed system decrease, the entropy will always increase as time progresses. Thus, in order to minimize the entropy of the system (your decision model) you must observe outside the system, refine the model of the environment, and determine the consistency of model with the real world. These 3 mathematical statements seem distant and not connected, but John Boyd was able to synthesize the ideas into a single framework for constructing a model of the world to be used for agile and optimal decision making. 

So how can these ideas be transferred to the design process? Well, John Boyd took the main ideas from the mathematical models described in the previous paragraph and came up with a process for dealing with uncertainty. At the beginning of any engineering project, there is a large amount of uncertainty about the goals and constraints for the system you’re attempting to design. So it seems like there should be a way of transferring Boyd’s ideas to an engineering project where creativity is required. Godel’s incompleteness theorem is utilized by Boyd to state that every system must use outside resources to prove the consistency of the system, so Boyd said that to be creative in a problem solving process, we must continuously be observing the known information. On top of our continuous observation, we must be looking for mental models and ideas that are outside of the system we are modeling/designing. This allows us to incorporate ideas from outside models in the solution of our problem – thinking outside the box, essentially. Next, the Indeterminacy Principle is utilized by Boyd to state that we must not focus too much of our attention on a single area of the problem because that will cause uncertainty in other areas of the solution. The uncertainty will cause poor design decisions in areas where you aren’t focusing your attention. This idea strongly reinforces the idea that an overall system perspective must be taken when designing a component (in addition to seeking ideas outside of the traditional design practices). The final component of the OODA loop expresses that a closed system always increases in disorder, so Boyd uses this idea in the loop to conclude that the creative design process should not be done in a vacuum or in a single pass – instead, you should be continuously iterating, observing new information, refining your understanding of the entire system, and “decreasing entropy” in your design.

Creativity is a complex skill to characterize and teach. John Boyd’s OODA loop system is just a model and inherently has its shortcomings and faults, but it is a highly useful tool in the creative problem solving task. In a somewhat circular statement, it’s pretty obvious that the OODA loop is actually a result of putting the loop into practice. Boyd observed the information around him to create a bank of knowledge on mathematical and physical laws of the universe (researched the current literature and “tools” available), orientated his mental model of the various laws (organized the information and saw how it could fit together), and then created a new system out of the ideas he observed – and if I had to guess, the entire process to come up with the OODA loop framework was iterative and went through many refinements. 