---
layout: post
title:  Laws of Trading
date:   2021-05-14 6:30:00 -0500
categories: books
---

*This post is a work-in-progress that I'm revising and adding to as I read through The Laws of Trading. So I apologize for poorly worded sentences and ideas that don't make too much sense at the moment!

I've always been interested in investing to some extent, but my understanding was limited to the fact that its just common sense to leave money in an asset that **theoretically** will appreciate, otherwise you're just leaving money on the table. Since graduating college last year, I now have a steady income which prompted me to take a closer look at the world of investing so that I could find the "optimal" strategy for maximizing my returns. Then, I experienced the Gamestop singularity in late January of this past year. Terms I had been vaguely familiar with were thrown around constantly like, short selling, market makers, hedge funds, calls/puts, options, etc. So I dove into the world of trading in an attempt to understand the nomenclature and the inner workings of the world of trading. The deeper I looked, the more I found that my interests crossed with the trading world. Interests like understanding human motivations and nature, decision making in uncertain and risky situations, and decision making while taking into account disparate sources of information (historical data, uncertain forecasts, politics, macro and micro economic trends, etc.). The <a target="_blank" href="https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B07SZ9W3LX/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B07SZ9W3LX&linkCode=as2&tag=andy25mann-20&linkId=d2f5ab531380d92bbe19215bffa5668d">The Laws of Trading</a> by Agustin Lebron is the latest source I've gone through in an attempt to understand trading at a deeper level. Many trading books offer "secrets" to make millions or promise massive returns, but I've found Agustin's book to provide an extremely rationale and rigorous view of the field of trading while offering tangible knowledge for operating successfully as a trader. I believe one of reasons the book stands above other books on trading is that Agustin understands the pervasiveness of trading. From the start, he outlines how the lessons contained in the book aren't restricted to financial markets, but in fact apply to all areas of life. In other words, we are constantly making trade-offs and making decisions where we balance potential rewards against the risks we are taking on. Since there is no single "recipe for success" in such a pervasive framework, Agustin outlines a set of laws for operating in a trading framework. This is the fundamental reason I believe the book is a must for anyone interested in studying the world of trading.

### Law 1: Know why you are doing a trade before you trade.
At first glance, I thought this law was a statement about knowing the mechanics of the trade and being able to explain your edge. But instead, the law is more focused about **self-awareness**. The rationale for self-awareness comes down to inherent human biases and overconfidence - since humans are the main decision makers in the world of trading, its imperative that you understand your personal motivations and biases so that you can trade within that context. Some of the motivations for trading outlined in the book are: Greed and fear, boredom, risk seeking, intellectual validity. Outside of greed and fear, I don't believe that any particular motivation for trading is inherently **bad**, but I do think its important to understand which motives, and in what percentage, drive you so that are conscious of them when trading. This law in particular is one I believe applies strongly outside of the world of financial trading as well. Operating in any environment (coworkers, family, friends, etc) requires self-awareness in order to make effective decisions. 

### Law 2: Adverse selection - you are never happy with the amount you traded.
This is an important contextual law for the world of trading. It provides an important explanation for emotions you feel after a trade and provides guidance for what is required to win a trade. Fundamentally, the is based on **information**. In a world of perfect and complete information, you would be able to definitively say that a trade you area about to execute as 100 percent probability of success - in that case, it makes sense to bet everything on that trade so that you gain the highest return. The problem is that the world of trading never offers a situation with perfect and complete information. The condition implies a few important concepts, first being that relative information matters. In order to win a trade, you just need to have better information than the person you are trading with. Theoretically, if you have better information and all else being equal, then you will win the trade. A concise formulation of this idea is be on the right side of **information assymetry**. A second lesson from the idea incomplete information is never being happy with the outcome of a trade. Essentially, if you win the trade you'll wish you bet more and if you lost the trade you'll wish you bet less. 

### Law 3: Take only the risks you are paid to take. Hedge the others. 
After talking with any trader, it will quickly become apparent that risk is at the front of their mind (after all, betting hard earned money is a risky business). The reason for risk's pervasiveness in trading is because trading is inherently coupled with risk. In order to make a profit, you must expose yourself to risk. Another way of thinking about this is to consider how work and effort is required to make money. In trading, this effort is represented as risk.
We'll get to edge shortly, but its important to know that only the trades with **edge** are profitable and edge is continually changing in the dynamic market. This means that you must constantly be trying new trades as your test the edges that you come up with. Since you're constantly exploring in a risky environment, you must be acutely aware of the risk that you are exposed to. (As an aside, I like to visualize this process as exploring a deserted island looking for "edge" - there is risk everyone on this unknown island and you must think carefully about the situations you put yourself in. Don't find yourself pinned on one side by a cliff and a giant snake on the other.). There are many methods of quantifying risk (I'll leave it up to the reader to look in to them if they'd like), but the important thing to remember is that each measure of risk has intrinsic faults so you should never rely on a single risk measure. Instead, understand a range of risk measures and internalize them so that you can navigate the trading island with a toolset capable of recognizing risk and avoiding it.

### Law 4: Put on risk using the most liquid instrument for that risk.
I think this law is a bit of a continuation of the previous law, since its based on mitigating risk. But there are also other reasons for pursuing high liquidity, like the decreased cost of trading on highly liquid instruments. Liquidity can be thought of as "how easy is it to buy or sell this asset?" - so a highly liquid asset would be one where there is a large supply combined with a large group of market participants willing to buy and sell the asset. An interesting idea to emerge from the Law that Agustin explained was how identifying the most liquid instrument forces you to explore the implications of your edge within the context of the entire market. The example he used was a trader thinking the earnings would be positive for a specific bank and how that could impact the entire market, so buying shares of SPY would be the most liquid instrument for gaining exposure to the impact of the bank's earnings report. Although SPY is the most liquid, it would require larger capital requirements to gain the same amount of exposure to the desired risk with the bank's stock (and you're also gaining risk exposure to the entire market, which is not what you want with this trade), so the optimal move would be some combination of buying the individual stock, bank ETFs, SPY, and selling SPY futures in order to hedge the market risk you're inherently gaining exposure to. 

### Law 5: If you can't explain your edge in 5 minutes then its not a very good one OR long term profitability is inversely proportional to how long the edge takes to explain.

I've mentioned edge a few times and we'll now define it, explain its importance, and outline how to construct an edge. Fundamentally, edge is a story. When I first started learning about trading I thought advantages in the market came from data analytics and big machine learning models that predicted price movements. But in reality, profitable trades require much more information than just data. This is because there is an uncountable amount of sources of information in trading and human intelligence and critical thought is required for distilling the disparate information and constructing a rationale explanation of whats going on. So edge is an explanation (a **story**) of why a trade is profitable in the context of the entire market - it is an answer to the question: "Why does this trade make money?". No amount of data can answer that question. It can only be answered with critical thinking over a range of information sources.

The downside of edge being a story is that humans have a tendency to embellish stories and succumb to intrinsic biases. Specifically, overconfidence bias (when we think we are more knowledge or better at something than we truly are) and confirmation bias (when we only look for information that supports our viewpoint) are the main sources of bias when we construct stories and traders must be acutely aware of how these biases can influence the edges that they construct.

There is a good amount of art and skill involved in constructing an edge. The begins with creativity - you have to identify something in the market that no one (or very few people) has already identified. Then you must be persistent in refining and editing the edge. Lastly, quantitatively and qualitatively review the edge - back test the edge on historical data, explore it from all angles, be critical about the process that led to the creation of the edge. Think about the edge in the context of your risk toolbox and seek to minimize the risk. Even though this idea is posed in the context of trading, I've appreciated thinking about other areas in the context of identifying and exploiting edge. One idea that stood out was as a researcher. We are constantly tasked with outlining the playing field of current research, identifying gaps, and using our unique knowledge and skillset to fill the gaps. The faster we can do this, the more publications we receive and the more funding we gain to continue the research - so it is a competitive field where edge matters. Another more common area to apply the idea of edge is in the business sector. A company that can identify an edge in the market and exploit the gap will gain market share and increase profits. They seek to construct a story for why a new business idea makes sense in the context of the market and how to execute the plan to gain market share.