---
layout: post
title:  "The Intellectual Deep End"
date:   2021-05-09 6:30:00 -0500
category: life
---

This past week I emerged from the second half of my first year in graduate school. I think it's safe to say that grad school is one of the most challenging tasks I've encountered and is already full of lessons learned. It's opened my eyes to some glaring weaknesses in my skill set (as it should), it's shown me where my understanding of graduate school was wrong, and its made me incredibly excited about my future growth and progress. But while thinking back over this past year, there are a few major areas where I totally missed the mark about what's involved in graduate school - and in a broader sense life in the 'real world'. 

The main source for how I missed the mark about graduate school was in my belief that getting a PhD was essentially a continuation of undergraduate school, but with the main difference that the classes are more challenging and there’s a research component. I knew that there were other differences, but this was what it all came down to in my mind. So, I entered graduate school with the same mindset that I had used with success during my undergraduate degree – create a checklist of requirements to graduate, find out how to get an A in each class, and move forward until all items are marked off on the list. By operating with this mindset in grad school, I thought all I needed to do to get my PhD and move on with my life was to finish my coursework as soon as possible, publish some journal articles, get my dissertation together, defend it, and move on. In hindsight, this mindset was absurdly naive. Yet, I don't blame myself for it - after all, my entire life up to this point had reinforced this mindset of “get the correct answer, mark the item off the list, then move on”. There are some major issues when trying to finish a PhD with this mindset though. They all come down to the fact that a PhD is much more like the "real world" than an undergraduate degree. By this I mean that while there are easily identifiable requirements to graduate, the playing field is much, much murkier, uncertain, dynamic, and competitive. On top of this uncertainty, you’re also thrown into the deep end of highly technical and complex fields in graduate school. The idea of treading water comes to mind frequently!

How is this “undergrad mindset” cultivated? Well, when you're growing up, you're typically shielded from major intellectual harm by your parents and the school system. In school, you're in an environment where there are right and wrong answers to the problems presented to you. Topics *must* be simplified down to this level in order to actually learn them when you’re just a kid. While there is nothing wrong with this, it often doesn't prepare you with a mental model that's capable of succeeding in the real world. This is because there rarely are strictly right and wrong answers to questions - the real world is dynamic, complex, uncertain, and multi-objective. And this is where my undergraduate mindset was blown apart by graduate school. I was prepared my whole life with this mindset of "checking items off the list" and getting right answers on tests in order to move on to the next level. But graduate school is like real life. Even though there are clear and identifiable requirements, the path that leads to achieving the requirements is murky, uncertain, and dynamic. Moreover, you’re not even equipped to navigate the path at the beginning of your degree so you must learn as you go.

So, to summarize my issue, when I started graduate school last fall, I had a mental checklist for what needed to be accomplished in order to graduate - all I needed to do was finish the checklist as soon as possible and I could move on with my life. But that strategy doesn’t work for grad school. Instead, graduate school is a place where the main goal is to *develop a new mental model that is capable of handling a dynamic, uncertain, and complex world* - the playing field and rules are totally different. Drawing the parallel between real life and graduate school in another way, Paul Graham [says](http://www.paulgraham.com/hs.html) that being an adult is about taking intellectual responsibility for yourself. I believe this is spot on for doctoral students as well - the process of getting a PhD is about learning how to take intellectual responsibility and ownership of your ideas and research. 

With this outlook, I think a better checklist for graduate school can be stated in two parts: (1) publish a dissertation that advances the scientific community's current understanding and (2) develop new mental models that are capable of operating within "real world" and broader scientific community. These two goals are deeply interrelated - you cannot achieve one without the other. Now that I've reached this conclusion, the obvious next question is "how?". Since the checklist is much more abstract than anything I’ve encountered, how in the world do you develop the skills to question assumptions and make judgements in uncertain situations where there aren’t clear cut answers?


My best guess at answering the "how?" question isn't novel or ground breaking in any way. In fact, I think its fairly simply and consists of just three things: read, write, and converse. Thankfully, graduate schools have figured this recipe out with reading, writing, and speaking being non-negotiables in any program. But reading, writing, and conversing are only beneficial for developing new mental models if you're aware of the *purpose* for the activities. So its important to frame these tasks from the standpoint of a PhD program. In other words, if you blindly read a journal article with an undergraduate mindset, you'll read it like a textbook and take everything as 100 percent correct. But from a PhD mindset, you'll read critically and look for holes in the assumptions and methods and you'll aim to identify areas where the results and conclusions don't align. This perspective shift is only possible if you're aware of the *purpose* for reading the journal article.

From the standpoint of advancing the scientific community and developing new mental models, what then is the purpose of reading, writing, and conversing? Reading provides the opportunity for finding new ideas, new questions to ask, new experiments and methods to explore. Since the scientific community is so vast and diverse, its extremely important to read as much as possible - but equally important to read *actively*. Active reading is what brings us to writing. Writing requires a second layer of thinking on top of reading. In order to write, you must think critically and carefully with what you are typing. You have to actually work to construct a logical sentence, paragraph, and paper. This process forces you to digest the papers and books you read and will reveal areas that you haven't read carefully enough. After all, if you can't sufficiently summarize a paper then you likely didn't read it or understand it well enough and must go back and actively read it again. So reading expands your intellectual horizons and writing solidifies the ideas. Conversing (or speaking) is similar to writing - its another exercise for digesting and formulating ideas that you encounter by reading the literature. I think an important difference is that speaking requires a bit more critical thinking than writing since its "on the fly". Basically, you'll understand very quickly if you actually understand something or not because you'll either do a good job explaining an argument to a colleague or you'll fail miserably. Conversing also provides an efficient outlet for having your ideas tested and refined by peers. You'll receive quick feedback from peers on the quality of ideas and the process will expose you to other views on the problems and suggested solutions you propose.

Not to discount my experience, but I don't think these ideas are particularly unique for someone in the first year in a doctorate program. After all, every student comes in with more or less the same set of tools from their previous 22 years. In fact, I would argue that these realizations aren't even unique to PhD students - these lessons can apply to anyone making the transition from college to their first full time job. From my internship experience, things are much less cut and dry at big engineering companies than one might expect, so I suspect the uncertainty is just as unnerving to a fresh college grad in their first year on the job. Finally to end - identifying a problem and a potential solution is comparatively easy to actually changing mental models and behaviors. Since the world is so uncertain, chaotic, and challenging, a tremendous amount of effort and care is required to identify the areas of your life that are inhibiting progress and the areas of your life that are cultivating progress. It's tricky to parse through the murkiness and isolate things that need changing and train things that need work. But I believe I have a good start with my cycle of reading, writing, and conversing.